I’ve always been fascinated with immigration to the United States, as its robust and diverging history has shaped the country’s very foundation. I focused my milestone 3 project on immigration to the United States and how the demographics of the country changed following the 1965 Immigration Act, which opened the country to a more ethnically diverse group of people. I found a large increase in the population percentage of Asian people, as well as a large decrease in the percentage of the population of White people not immediately following but in the years and decades after the act was passed. I decided to expand on this work in my final project, where I could graph a visual that would show immigration numbers by region over time again.  

This time I wanted to make three changes. Firstly, I wanted to shift from demographic numbers of US citizens (recorded in the US census) to actual immigrant populations; I didn’t want either birth rates or death rates of certain groups to skew results, and so I wanted a census of immigrant-only populations by ethnicity or nationality. Secondly, I wanted to focus on a different period of time than the one surrounding 1965. I’ve always been fascinated with pre-World War 1 immigration, where immigration shifted from Western European nations to Southern and Eastern European nations (prompting the ethnocentric-based National Origins Act). However, upon scouring the internet, there was no amalgamated data collection of the national or ethnic origin of immigrants who arrived at Ellis Island or elsewhere, and I would be forced to count each individual manually. I decided instead to shift my focus to the present day (2000-2024) to analyze how immigration has changed in recent years. I realized this is better for my final project, as my former project studied the change from the 1950s to 1990s and now this would work on a continuation of that major immigration reform to the present day. My general research question was, without a major amendment to the 1965 Immigration Act, how did different regions’ immigration numbers naturally change? Finally, I decided to expand from a simple linear graph to a geographic flowchart that would better visually exhibit changes in the origins of immigrants arriving to the United States. This flowchart would show lines that connected from different regions to the United States; the expansion of the immigrant population from those regions would correspond with a thickening of the line.  

My general thesis included that history would repeat itself: dominant host countries would see moderate proportional emigration decline, and new emerging regions would see rapid ascents. I predicted a sharp decrease in the European immigrant population to the United States as a continuation from the late 20th century, and I expected immigrant populations from Asia and Africa to swell and for Latin American immigration to slow down in comparison. I also predicted a huge spike in immigration following the covid-19 pandemic when the United States reopened to immigration after a long thaw. I expected immigration to increase consistently but at slightly lower percent increases year over year than in the 80s and 90s.  

The most difficult part of the process was finding usable datasets. I could not find good immigration census numbers in a clean data table on a site like Kaggle and instead had to download the data from an Excel sheet. The Excel sheet had to be read with a non-openpyxl reader that I had to learn on my own, and the datable had to be greatly cleaned to make it usable for the animation. Following the long cleaning process, I placed the lines and created the formula for the flow progression of the lines using Scattergeo. I had to develop a “for” function that loops through the yearly data and applies it to the different regions. Finally, I had to combine the mapping process with the data processing to animate the change. The animation change required advanced skills on Plotly that I had to google. A lot of the code was understandable for me due to the fact that I see Plotly much like an extension of Matplotlib, which we learned in class. Ultimately, the product ran after much trial and error, but the results themselves did not align entirely with my thesis.  

One limitation of the project exists in the way census data is collected for legal immigrants. It only collects legal immigrant populations, excluding undocumented people. Calculations are far more likely to include higher-income and privileged immigrants with legal status over any other immigrants. This might skew results towards nations and regions where legal immigration paths are more likely versus nations where undocumented crossings are more of a possibility.  

My results surprised me in a few ways. One aspect of the project I would wish to improve upon is the clarity of the lines since it’s hard to see any major increase in thickness, especially over a year of iteration. However, this lack of change indicates an argument in itself: that large-scale change in immigration demographic numbers is a slow process over time. My thesis was confirmed for the most part that the historical regions that hosted immigrants to the United States would grow disproportionately to rising regions like Asia and Africa, but I thought this change would be more apparent and would happen quicker. The population of immigrants identifying as European instead of sharply declining remained essentially flat over the 25 years of analysis. Similarly, while Asia and Africa grew at higher proportional rates (especially Africa) than Latin America, Latin America still had the thickest line by far at the end and still grew by 9 million people. This overall exhibits that, especially without a major restriction or sharp reversal of policy, natural demographical immigration flows will adjust slowly. Even in the current political landscape, where immigration statistics are often presented hyperbolically to fearmonger the public, the actual statistics follow a more moderate path.  
